Startup Engineering
Bala ji S. Srinivasan
Stanford University

Class: class.coursera.org/startup-001
Signup: coursera.org/course/startup
Forums: bit.ly/startup-eng-forum

Market Research, Wireframing, and Design

Idea, Execution, and Market
We begin with an interesting comment on Quora, which we’ve slightly modiﬁed:

An idea is not a mockup
A mockup is not a prototype
A prototype is not a program
A program is not a product
A product is not a business
And a business is not proﬁts

This doubles as a kind of state machine for your ideas as you push them through to production;
at each stage many ideas fail to make it to the next one, both because of time requirements
and because of some heretofore nonobvious ﬂaw (Table 1). In particular, while you should
be able to get to the program stage with purely technical training, the last three stages are
in many ways the most challenging for pure scientists and engineers, because they generally
aren’t well taught in school. Let’s see if we can explain why.

Table 1: The idea state machine. Any successful entrepreneur has not one good idea, but a profusion
of good ideas that lie abandoned at the beginning of the state machine, at the base of this pyramid.
Moreover, many more napkin ideas (e.g. micropayments) have fatal ﬂaws that only become apparent
in the implementation stage. It is only through actual ly pushing ideas through the state machine that
one realizes whether they are good or not. It’s useful to actual ly keep a single Google Spreadsheet or
orgmode document with al l your ideas, organized by stage in this manner. Expect most to stay at the
idea stage!

What’s required to complete?
Stage
Idea
Napkin drawing of billion dollar concept
Mockup Wireframe with all user screens
Prototype Ugly hack that works for single ma jor use case
Clean code that works for all use cases, with tests
Program
Design, copywriting, pricing, physical components
Product
Incorporation, regulatory ﬁlings, payroll, . . .
Business
Proﬁts
Sell product for more than it costs you to make it

Minimum Time
1 minute
1 day+
1 weekend+
2-4 weeks+
3-6 months+
6-12 months+
1 year-∞

Idea
When it comes to starting a business, the conventional wisdom is that the idea is everything.
This is why US politicians and patent lawyers recently pushed for the America Invents Act,

1

why many people think they could have invented Facebook1 , and why reputed patent troll
Intellectual Ventures is able to make money from 2000 shell companies without ever shipping
a product. In other words, the conventional wisdom is that with the right idea, it’s just a
matter of details to bring it to market and make a billion bucks. This is how the general
public thinks technological innovation happens.

Execution
An alternate view comes from Bob Metcalfe, the inventor of Ethernet and founder of 3Com:

Metcalfe says his proudest accomplishment at the company was as head of sales
and marketing. He claims credit for bringing revenue from zero to more than $1
million a month by 1984. And he’s careful to point out that it was this aptitude
- not his skill as an inventor - that earned him his fortune.
“Flocks of MIT engineers come over here,” Metcalfe tells me, leading me up the
back staircase at Beacon Street. “I love them, so I invite them. They look at this
and say, ‘Wow! What a great house! I want to invent something like Ethernet.” ’
The walls of the narrow stairway are lined with photos and framed documents,
like the ﬁrst stock certiﬁcate issued at 3Com, four Ethernet patents, a photo of
Metcalfe and Boggs, and articles Metcalfe has written for The New York Times
and The Wall Street Journal.
“I have to sit ‘em down for an hour and say, ‘No, I don’t have this house because I
invented Ethernet. I have this house because I went to Cleveland and Schenectady
and places like that. I sold Ethernet for a decade. That’s why I have this house.
It had nothing to do with that brainstorm in 1973.” ’

In some ways this has become the new conventional wisdom: it’s not the idea, it’s the ex-
ecution. You’ll see variants of this phrase repeated constantly on Hacker News. The rationale
here is that it’s easy to come up with a trivial idea like “let’s build a social network”, but quite
nontrivial to work out the many technical details associated with bringing that idea to market,
from large-scale decisions like using a symmetric or asymmetric social network by default to
small-scale details like how a “Poke” works. It’s also extremely nontrivial to actually turn a
popular technology into a proﬁtable business; just ask Second Life or Digg.
And that’s the reason this phrase is repeated constantly on Hacker News: “It’s not the
idea, it’s the execution” is an excellent reminder, sort of a mantra, a whip for them to self-
ﬂagellate themselves into a state of focus.
It’s also useful for startup novices or dreamers
to hear it at least once, as novices tend to assign far too much importance to patents or
to seemingly brilliant ideas without working prototypes. As a rule of thumb, early on in a
company a patent is only useful as a sort of formal chit to show an investor that you have
some kind of defensible technology, and then too a provisional patent is ﬁne. And as another
rule of thumb, if someone can steal your idea by simply hearing about it, you probably don’t
have something yet that is truly defensible. Compare I have an idea for a social network for
pet owners to I’ve developed a low-cost way to launch objects into space.
The net of it is that you can usually be reasonably open about discussing your ideas
with people who can give a good bounce, who can understand the idea rapidly and throw

1Facebook’s backend is highly nontrivial (1, 2, 3) and comparable only to Google. Even with regards to
the UI, just as it is far easier to verify a solution than to arrive at one, it is much easier to copy a UI than to
invent it in the ﬁrst place (especially given the knowledge that a billion people found it congenial).

2

it back with modiﬁcations. The vast ma jority of people are busy with their own things, or
aren’t uncreative sorts who are both extremely good at execution and just waiting around
to steal your idea. The one exception is Hacker News, and perhaps the startup community
more generally. If you have a pure internet startup idea, you should think carefully about
whether you want to promote it there before you’ve advanced it to at least a prototype stage.
Unless your customers are developers, you need to raise funding imminently, or you want to
recruit developers, you don’t necessarily need to seek validation from the startup press and
community.
That’s one of the reasons that the execution is prized over the idea: people will copy the
idea as soon as the market is proved out. No matter how novel, once your idea starts making
money the clones will come out of the woodwork. The reason is that it’s always easier to check
a solution than to ﬁnd a solution in the ﬁrst place. And a product sel ling like hotcakes is the
ultimate demonstration that you have found a solution to a market need. Now that you’ve
done the hard work, everyone is going to copy that solution while trying to put their own
unique spin on it. So you’re going to need excellent execution to survive, because sometimes
these “clones” far surpass the originals. . . as exempliﬁed by Google’s victory over AltaVista
(and every other search engine) and Facebook’s victory over Myspace and Friendster (and
every other social network). This is why it sometimes makes sense to keep your head down
and grow once you’ve hit product-market ﬁt without alerting competitors to the scale of your
market opportunity.

Market
There’s also a third view. From an investor’s standpoint, one can roughly substitute “product”
for “idea” and “team” for “execution”. That is, given a good idea for a product, a strong team
will execute on that idea and push through all the details (ﬁnancial, regulatory, technical,
legal) to get that product to market. With this mapping, the new-new conventional wisdom
is that it’s neither the product/idea or the team/execution but rather the market. Here’s
Marc Andreessen on the topic:

Personally, I’ll take the third position – I’ll assert that market is the most impor-
tant factor in a startup’s success or failure.
Why?
In a great market – a market with lots of real potential customers – the market
pulls product out of the startup. The market needs to be fulﬁlled and the market
will be fulﬁlled, by the ﬁrst viable product that comes along. The product doesn’t
need to be great; it just has to basically work. And, the market doesn’t care how
good the team is, as long as the team can produce that viable product.

So which is most important: product/idea, execution/team, or market?
One answer is that for a startup veteran or someone who understands any machine learning,
the debate is somewhat moot. All these factors (idea, execution, market, team, product) are
important to varying degrees; the main point of saying “it’s the execution, not the idea” is to
disabuse a novice of the idea that patents matter much at inception, or that a brilliant idea
on a napkin2 has much value. You can think of these things on a continuum. Ideas range

2One argument is that a novel equation or ﬁgure is an exception, such as Ramanujan’s notebooks or the
Feynman diagrams. Something like that truly is valuable, more in the sense of I’ve developed a low-cost way

3

in quality from “a social network for dogs” to “Maxwell’s equations”, and execution ranges in
quality from “I’ll start a company some day” to “sold or IPO’d company”. As important as
the execution is, without a clear vision of where you want your company to go you will never
come up with an idea that others want to copy. So how do you come up with a good idea?

The Idea Maze
One answer is that a good founder doesn’t just have an idea, s/he has a bird’s eye view of
the idea maze. Most of the time, end-users only see the solid path through the maze taken by
one company. They don’t see the paths not taken by that company, and certainly don’t think
much about all the dead companies that fell into various pits before reaching the customer.
The maze is a reasonably good analogy (Figure 1. Sometimes there are pits you just
can’t cross. Sometimes you can get past a particular minotaur/enter a new market, but only
after you’ve gained treasure in another area of the maze (Google going after email after it
made money in search). Sometimes the maze itself shifts over time, and new doors open as
technologies arrive (Pandora on the iPhone). Sometimes there are pits that are uncrossable for
you, but are crossable by another (Webvan failed, but Amazon, Walmart, and Safeway have
the distribution muscle to succeed). And sometimes there are pitfalls that are only apparent
when one company has reached scale, problems which require entering the maze at the very
beginning with a new weapon (e.g. Google’s Pagerank was inspired in part by Alta Vista’s
problems at scale, problems that were not apparent in 1991).
A good founder is thus capable of anticipating which turns lead to treasure and
which lead to certain death. A bad founder is just running to the entrance of (say) the
“movies/music/ﬁlesharing/P2P” maze or the “photosharing” maze without any sense for the
history of the industry, the players in the maze, the casualties of the past, and the technologies
that are likely to move walls and change assumptions (Figure 1).
In other words: a good idea means a bird’s eye view of the idea maze, understanding all the
permutations of the idea and the branching of the decision tree, gaming things out to the end
of each scenario. Anyone can point out the entrance to the maze, but few can think through
all the branches. If you can verbally and then graphically diagram a complex decision tree
with many alternatives, explaining why your particular plan to navigate the maze is superior
to the ten past companies that fell into pits and twenty current competitors lost in the maze,
you’ll have gone a long way towards proving that you actually have a good idea that others
did not and do not have. This is where the historical perspective and market research is key;
a strong new plan for navigating the idea maze usually requires an obsession with the market,
a unique insight from deep thought that others did not see, a hidden door. You can often
distinguish these good ideas because they require the explanation of an arcane acronym or
regulation like KYC (Paypal) or LDT (Genomic Health) or OTARD (Aereo).

The Execution Mindset
We’ve spoken about what good ideas are. What does good execution involve, in concrete
terms? Brieﬂy speaking, the execution mindset means doing the next thing on the todo list
at all times and rewriting the list every day and week in response to progress. This is easy
to say, extremely hard to do. It means saying no to other people, saying no to distractions,
saying no to fun, and exerting all your waking hours on the task at hand. The execution

to launch objects into space than I have an idea for a social network for pet owners.

4

Figure 1: Visualizing the idea maze. A good idea is not just the one sentence which gains you entrance
to the maze. It’s the col lection of smal ler tweaks that deﬁnes a path through the maze, along with
explanations of why this particular combination wil l work while others nearby have failed. Note that this
requires an extremely detailed understanding of your current and potential competitors; if you believe
you don’t have any competitors, think again until you’ve found the most obvious adjacent market. This
exercise is of crucial importance; as Larry El lison said, “Choose your competitors careful ly, as you
wil l become a lot like them.”

mindset is thus about running the maze rapidly. Think of each task on the list as akin to
exploring a turn of the maze. The most important tasks are those that get you to the maze
exit, or at least a treasure chest with some powerups.
In terms of execution heuristics, perhaps the best is Thiel’s one thing, which means that
everyone in the company should at all times know what their one thing is, and others should
know that as well. Marc Andreessen’s anti-todo list is also worthy of mention: periodically
writing down what you just did and then crossing it oﬀ. Even if you get oﬀ track, this gives
you a sense of what you are working on and your progress to date.

Implementing “Thiel’s One Thing” with Gmail chat status. Good tools can help with execu-
tion. For personal tasks, emacs orgmode is highly recommended as it’s completely keyboard
driven, works oﬄine, scales from a simple todo list to a full blown document, and integrates
arbitrary code snippets. For company-wide tasks, a combination of Github Issues and Gmail
Chat status messages can be used to broadcast the link of the issue you’re currently working
on.

If there’s something that’s worth nagging people about, it’s keeping their Gchat status
up to date with their latest Github issue in this fashion. It constantly refocuses you on your
one thing, and allows the entire company to know what that is without constant interrupts.
Periodically, you too can scan what others are working on without disrupting their ﬂow.

5

PandoraBittorrentGoogle PlaySpotifyNetflixYoutubeiTunespost-iPhoneI've got an idea for doingmusic/movies on the internet!The Idea MazeA "good idea" is a detailed path through the maze. Why does your path lead to treasure: competitor oversight, new technology , or something else?opensourceclosedsourcefreepayper downloadno substantial non-infringing usesubstantial non-infringing use (post- Napster)musicsubscriptionlabel dealsonlymoviesoriginalnon-HollywoodcontentHollywoodcontentmonetizevia adsmonetizevia paidaccountsmobile computer in every pocket (2008+)music andmoviesAmazonStreamingFigure 2: To implement the “one thing” heuristic with Gmail status and Github issues, set up a new
custom message.

Figure 3: Now anyone can click to see the one thing you are working on, and can comment in your
ticket. The only thing you are doing is what is in your status.

6

What Kind of Business Do you Want to Build?

Startups vs. Small Businesses
It’s useful at the very outset to distinguish between startups and small businesses (see also
here). A startup is about growth: it is a play for world domination, an attempt to build a
business with global reach and billions in annual revenue. Examples include Google, Facebook,
Square, AirBnB, and so on. Startups usually involve new technology and unproven business
models. A small business, by contrast, does not have ambitions of world domination. It is
usually geared towards a particular geographical area or limited market where it has some
degree of monopoly through virtue of sheer physical presence. Examples include pizza parlors,
laundromats, or a neighborhood cafe.
With these deﬁnitions you can start to see why startups are associated with the internet
and small businesses with physical storefronts. It’s easier to scale something virtual from 1
to 1 billion users. Having said that, there are virtual operations that make a virtue out of
being “lifestyle businesses” (e.g. 37Signals) and physical operations that yield to none in their
ambition for scale and world domination (e.g. Starbucks, McDonalds).
Another important distinction is that small businesses must usually generate proﬁts right
away, while startups often go deep into the red for quite a while before then sharply turning
into the black (in a good scenario) or going bankrupt (in a bad one3 ). Ideally one accumulates
the capital to start either a small business or a startup through after-tax savings coupled with
a willingness to endure extremely low or zero personal income during the early non-revenue-
generating period of the small business/startup.
But soon after inception one encounters a crossroads: should you take outside capital from
VCs to try to grow the business more rapidly and shoot for the moon, or should you rely on
steady organic growth? Taking venture capital is much like strapping a jetpack to a man
who’s been running at a nice trot. It could lead to a terrible wipeout or a ﬂight to the moon.
The most important consideration in this decision is your own ambition and personal utility
function: can you tolerate the failure of your business? Because if you can’t go to zero, you
shouldn’t try to go to inﬁnity (1, 2, 3).

Startups Must Exhibit Economies of Scale
So let’s say that you do want to go to the moon rather than build a lifestyle business. Your
next step is to do a simple calculation to determine whether a given business is capable of
getting there, namely whether it exhibits an economy of scale.
Suppose that we have a startup with the following property: it sells each unit for $1000,
but the per-unit cost drops as more units are sold, exhibiting an economy of scale, as shown
in Table 2. A table of this kind can arise from an upfront cost of $50,000 for software
development to handle the ﬁrst 100 orders [($1200-$700) * 100], and then another $247,500
[($975-$700)*900] in ﬁxed costs for design/manufacturing revisions to support more than 1000
customers. After those two ﬁxed expenditures, the startup is only paying per-unit costs, like
the amortized cost of customer service and the cost of materials.
This simple calculation illustrates many things about the startup world. First, one can
see immediately how important it is to shift per-unit costs into ﬁxed costs (e.g. via software),

3Note though that even a money-losing company is an asset, though: under the US tax code, losses in
previous years can be counted against proﬁts in current years, so acquiring a money-losing business for a song
can be an excellent way for a large company to shield some proﬁts from taxes (see deferred tax assets).

7

and why seemingly costly up-front software development can pay oﬀ in the long run. Second,
one can determine how much capital is needed before the business breaks even; this is one
of several calculations that a venture capitalist will want to see before investing nontrivial
money into the business. (Note that your low point is usually much lower than in your perfect
model!) Third, one realizes how important pricing is; insofar as you are not constrained by
competition, you really do want to charge the highest possible price at the beginning in order
to get into the black as soon as possible. A seemingly insigniﬁcant change from $1000 up
to $1200 would completely change the economics of this business and make it unecessary
to take on outside capital. Moreover, free or heavily discounted customers generally don’t
value the product and are counterintuitively the most troublesome; paying customers are
surprisingly more tolerant of bugs as they feel like they’re invested in the item. Fourth, one
starts to understand why it is so incredibly diﬃcult to achieve $199 or $99 price points without
massive scale. A real product has dozens if not hundreds of cost components, each of which
has their own economy-of-scale function, and each of which needs to be individual ly driven to
the ﬂoor (via robotics, supply chain optimizations, negotiation, etc.) in order to decrease the
overall price of the product. It’s hard to make a proﬁt!

Table 2: A product that exhibits an economy of scale. The cost function is plotted in Figure 4.

Number of units Cost of production per unit Revenue per unit
0 ≤ n ≤ 100
$1000
$1200
101 ≤ n ≤ 1000
$975
$1000
1001 ≤ n
$1000
$700

Figure 4: A product with an economy of scale: costs decline with volume.

8

050010001500700800900100011001200A product with an economy of scale:costs decline as volume increases.Units soldCost−per−unitFigure 5: A product with an economy of scale: initial ly one goes into the red, then pul ls up.

Startups Must Pursue Large Markets
Even if you can build a product with an economy of scale, you need to ensure that it serves a
large market. The annual market size is the total number of people who will buy the product
per year multiplied by the price point. To get to a billion dollars in annual revenue ($1B),
you need either a high price point or a large number of customers. Here are a few diﬀerent
ways to achieve that magic $1B ﬁgure in diﬀerent industries:

• Sel l product at $1 to 1 bil lion : Coca Cola (cans of soda)
• $10 to 100 mil lion : Johnson and Johnson (household products)
• $100 to 10 mil lion : Blizzard (World of Warcraft)
• $1,000 to 1 mil lion : Lenovo (laptops)
• $10,000 to 100,000 : Toyota (cars)
• $100,000 to 10,000 : Oracle (enterprise software)
• $1,000,000 to 1,000 : Countrywide (high-end mortgages)

Now, some of these markets are actually much larger than $1B. There are many more
than 100,000 customers for $10,000 cars in the world, for example; the number is more like
100,000,000 annual customers for $10,000 cars. So the annual automobile market for new
cars is actually in the ballpark of $1T, not $1B. And that’s why Google is going after self-
driving cars: it’s one of the few things that is a substantially bigger market than even search
advertising.

9

050010001500050000100000150000050010001500050000100000150000A product with an economy of scale:go into the red, then pull up.Num. Units soldCumulative Profit/LossMinimum initialcapital needed: $20000Break even point: 900 soldNote in particular that low price points require incredible levels of automation and indus-
trial eﬃciency to make reasonable proﬁts. You can’t tolerate many returns or lawsuits for
each $1 can of Coke. Relatedly, high price points subsidize sales; it is not 100,000 as much
sales time to sell a house as it is to sell a can of Coke, but it is 100,000 as much revenue.

Do Market Sizing Calculations Early and Often
With this basic grounding in market size, take a look at Figure 6. This simple schematic
is what many doctorates wish they’d been shown on the ﬁrst day of graduate school. As
background, your modal PhD student works on a pro ject which is technically challenging and
highly prestigious within their advisor’s subculture. After six years, if they are entrepreneuri-
ally inclined, they might think about commercializing their technology.
It is at this point
that all too many do their very ﬁrst back-of-the-envelope calculation on a napkin about the
possible market size of their work. And often that calculation does not go well.
Instead, an incredible amount of time and energy could have been saved if at the begin-
ning the student had simply enumerated every pro ject s/he found equivalently scientiﬁcally
interesting, and then rank-ordered said pro jects by their market size. With all else held equal,
if you have committed to spending several years of your life on a PhD, you want to pick the
pro ject with the largest market potential.
Among other things, market size determines how much money you can raise, which in turn
determines how many employees you can support. As a back of the envelope, suppose that
the average Bay Area startup employee costs $100,000 “all in”, with this ﬁgure including not
just salary but health insurance, parking spaces, computer equipment, and the like. Suppose
further that you think you need just ﬁve employees for three years to come up with the cure
for a rare disease. Then to support just ﬁve employees per year is $500,000 per year, not
including any other business expenses. But if your market size is only $50M, then you have
a problem, because it is going to be very diﬃcult to ﬁnd someone who will invest $1.5M for
three years of R&D to pursue such a small market. Among other things, you won’t capture
the entire market, but only a portion. And if it’s going to take three years, that $1.5M could
go towards something that has a chance at a $1B+ market.
The best market size estimates are both surprising and convincing. To be surprising is the
art of the presentation. But to be convincing, you want to estimate your market size in at least
two diﬀerent ways. First, use Fermi estimates to determine the number of people who will
buy your product (top-down market sizing). This will require knowledge of general stats like
300M Americans, 6B world population, 6M US businesses, as well as domain-speciﬁc stats like
4M pregnancies (see also Figures 7 and 8). Second, use SEC ﬁlings of comparable companies
in the industry to get empirical revenue ﬁgures and sum these up (bottom-up market sizing);
we did this in HW2 with market-research.js. The latter is generally more reliable, though you
must be sure that you are not drawing your boundaries too broadly or optimistically (“if we
only get 1% of China. . . ”). One of the most convincing things you can do with a bottoms-up
estimate is to directly link or screenshot an invoice with a high price point; for example, one
has no idea how high the price points in the recruiting or PR markets are until you actually
encounter them.

10

Figure 6: Qualitative graph of market size (in $) vs. scientiﬁc novelty (in citations or impact factor).

11

Scientific Novelty(e.g. # of citations)Market size(in USD)Old EconomyIdealAcademiaMost StartupsMcDonald's2007Facebook2013FacebookGoogleHuman genomesequencingC. elegans genome sequencing2004 FacebookTodo listsMarket size vs. noveltyIf you are choosing between two projects of equal scientific interest, pick the one with the larger market size. And do that calculation up front, not at the end of your six year PhD program.Market Research
So we now understand that a good idea means a bird’s eye view of the idea maze and that
the execution mindset means rapidly navigating the idea maze. We also see how market size
drives not just the relevance of the company, but also controls downstream parameters like
the quantity of money that can be raised and hence the number of employees.

Tools for market research
Let’s now get down to brass tacks and talk about tools for market research. Suppose that
you’ve identiﬁed a possible market and want to drill down. For example, suppose your hy-
pothesis based on recent news stories is that the US dollar will eventually be replaced by the
Chinese yuan as the world’s reserve currency, and you believe a service that would make it
easier for people to move their bank accounts from USD to RMB would be of value. How
would you validate this hypothesis?

1. First, you’d want to have some news coverage or research papers to establish the overall
frame; these will be display pieces in any pitch to investors. Going to Google Books for
the history and reading SEC ﬁlings and Wikipedia can be extremely helpful.

2. Next, you want to do a back of the envelope estimate of market size, Googling as
necessary for any statistics.

3. Then you want to further validate this market with some modern tools,
Google’s Keyword Planner and Facebook’s Advertiser Tools. (Figures 7-8).

including

4. If that proves fruitful, you should develop a simple landing page by using a service like
Launchrock, photos from iStockphoto, and icons from iconﬁnder. You may also want
to read up on some basic SEO. We’ll mostly focus on the crowdfunder, but Launchrock
can be a complement to that approach. If your users need to see ﬂows to understand
the product, you will want to create some wireframes (see Figure 10).

5. Finally, you want to allocate a small Google Adwords or Facebook Ads budget to test
out the market, and see how many conversions you get.

The overall concept here is to establish that a market exists before building a so-called
minimum viable product (MVP). This process is related to some of the ideas from the Lean
Startup school of thinking. Now, the ideas from this school can be taken too far. . . as Henry
Ford famously noted, if he had asked his customers what they wanted, they would have asked
for a faster horse. But most people new to startups aren’t in danger of talking to too many
customers.

12

Figure 7: Facebook’s realtime census tool is one of their most underappreciated features. Go to
facebook.com/advertising and log in. Then begin creating an ad, and you’l l see the realtime census
tool depicted above. You can use this to complement the Google tools and do some incredible realtime
market research. For example, you can ﬁnd the number of men ages 18-34 in Oregon who have an
interest in snowboarding. These kinds of numbers let you get quick upper bounds on market sizes.

13

facebook.com/advertisingFB Ads: Outstanding census tool for doing realtimecensus of people interested in a specific idea. Fantastic for bottoms-up market research.Figure 8: You can use Google’s Keyword Planner at adwords.google.com/ko/KeywordPlanner to help
estimate market size. Simply ﬁgure out some keywords related to your market, plug them in to get
daily search volumes, and estimate what fraction of those would actual ly convert and at what price
point. Use a few diﬀerent values to get rough lower and upper bounds for the market. Then repeat
with a few other related keyword sets to triangulate on a result.

14

adwords.google.com/ko/KeywordPlannerGoogle Adwords' Keyword Planner gives you bottoms-up statistics on search queries. This is more suitable for assessing purchase intentthan determining the number of individuals with a given interest.A framework for determining product tiers
Once you’ve got your overall market that you’re targeting, you’ll need to come up with a
product idea. For now let’s call that your moment of insight and creativity. If you have that
product idea, though, in what order do you build features? First, read about Kickstarter
product tiers and trends. The heuristic price points in this post are a good start, but we can
supplement this with a little bit of theory, as shown in Figure 9.
The basic idea is that the ultimate market research is a table with 7 billion rows (one for
each person), N columns on their attributes (e.g.
location, profession) and K columns (one
for each product version), with each entry giving the amount that person will pay for those
features. Now, of course you won’t be able to sample all 7 billion, but you can sample a few
hundred (e.g. with Google Consumer Research Surveys or Launchrock landing pages), and
this gives you a conceptual framework for how to set up your product tiers.
Continuing with the conceptual example, in Figure 9 the CEO with PersonID 3 (i.e. the
3rd person out of 7 billion people) wants your product so much that s/he will pay up to $1000
for the version 1 with features 1 and 2. The vast ma jority of people will pay $0 no matter
how many features you add. Histograms on these columns give the range of pricing that the
market will tolerate, and allow you to estimate the amount of revenue you will make on each
version (see in particular Spolsky on price segmentation). In particular, you want to conﬁrm
that you will make enough money on version 1 to pay for version 2. If this is not the case,
you should rearrange the order of features until it is true, at least on paper.
If you are seriously considering starting a business, paying $250 for a demographically
targeted survey with 500 responses will save you much more than that in the long run in
terms of time/energy expenditure, at least if you’re in the US. Even spending $1000 to seriously
evaluate four ideas will be well worth it in terms of the time/energy savings (though you should
do one survey and review the results before you commit to doing more). If you genuinely can’t
aﬀord this, ask 10-20 of your friends how much they’d pay for diﬀerent version of your product,
or run a poll on Facebook. You will ﬁnd that early feedback on pricing and features - even
biased feedback - is greatly superior to none at all.

15

Figure 9: A conceptual framework for selecting product tiers and prioritizing features/versions.

16

Product Tier Selection: A Conceptual FrameworkOnce you've settled on a market and a broad product idea, you need to think about exactly what your product versions will be and what features you will prioritize in each version. Here's a simple conceptual framework to guide that process, ensuring that you make enough revenue from each step to fund the development of the next stage.32122Starbucks23CEOSelfExxon...GenderAgeBarista7e93M2...FEmployer...FMechanicM27ScientistMNIHStartup Co...394PersonIDJob...Engineer$0$0$0$0$0$200$1000$100$0$10$2000Version 2...$0......Version 3$1500Version 1$200$10...NVersion 1YVersion 3YYVersion 2..NY...Feature 2YYY...Feature 4Feature 1YFeature 3N...Y$1,000,000TimeFeature 1$500,000...200 daysFeature 2Cost50 daysFeature 3......100 days$50,000Step 1: What is the maximum price each demographic would pay for each version of your product? You can't assess all 7e9, but you can survey a subset.Step 2: What features are associated with each version?Step 3: What is the estimated cost/time to build each feature?$0$1000$20006.9e9 (most will never buy )~100,000PersonID 3 adds to the count of 100,000 people worldwidewho'd buy v1 at a max price of $1000Version 1: Reserve Price# of people who would buy at this price100010,000100Step 5: Calculate market sizeRough global market size for v1with perfect segmentation(100,000) * $1000 + (10,000 * ($1100 + $1200)) +(1000 * ($1300 + … + $2000) = $136.2MRough global market size for v1 priced at $1000: $128MIs this greater than the cost of v1's features? In this case, yes.Step 4: From your survey, what does the histogram of maximum prices ("reserve prices") look like for v1, and what's the estimated revenue?Wireframing, Copywriting, and Design
Once you feel that you have a market, you’ll want to design a mockup of your product’s
website, also known as a wireframe. For the purposes of this class, we’ll presume two things:
ﬁrst, that every product in the class will have a web component. Second, that the product
itself will be initially marketed through your own crowdfunding website, but will ultimately
have its own dedicated website. Indeed, this crowdfunding website can ultimately morph into
the product website over time.

Wireframing
There are many excellent wireframing tools, and we’ve picked out four in particular that
are of interest Figure 10. For editing on the computer, Omnigraﬄe Pro is very good for
oﬄine editing, Lucidchart is useful for collaborative wireframing, and Jetstrap makes it easy
to convert a ﬁnal design to Twitter Bootstrap. For converting oﬄine pen and paper mockups,
POP (popapp.in) is really worth trying out. Try these tools out and ﬁnd one you like; your
main goal is to produce sitemaps and detailed user ﬂows that look something like this.

17

Figure 10: A survey of four useful wireframing tools. Pick the one that works best with your style.

18

jetstrap.comAdvantage: Directly export toHTML/CSS/JS and mockupwith Bootstrap objectspopapp.inAdvantage: Prototypewith pen and paper andeasily make clickable workflowslucidchart.comAdvantage: Supports multiplayercollaboration and works with Google Driveomnigroup.com/products/omnigraffleAdvantage: Offline support, many stencilsat Graffletopia, and excellent keyboard shortcutsCopywriting
Here are some high level copywriting principles.
• Homepage message : If it’s not a homepage message, it’s not a message. Don’t expect
visitors to ﬁgure out what the product is about on the third page in; your enemy is the
back button. That said, only spend energy on the homepage if it’s a signiﬁcant source
of customers. If it isn’t (e.g. if your sales come through a salesforce), you can leave the
homepage alone for a surprisingly long time.
• Work backwards from the press release : Amazon writes the press release before they
build the product. In doing this, you will ﬁnd yourself ﬁguring out what features are
news and which ones are noise. Take a look at their press releases to get a sense for
tone.
• Someone is wrong on the internet : Get a friend, have them pull up as many competitor
webpages as possible, and you will quickly ﬁnd yourself explaining to them why those
companies are terrible and why yours is diﬀerent. This is valuable. Write down your
immediate gut reaction as to why your product is indeed diﬀerent. Put this into a feature
matrix (example) and then determine whether your new features really diﬀerentiate your
product substantially.
• Simple and factual : Do your best to turn vague features (“PageRank provides better
search quality”) into concrete facts and statistics (“X% of searchers who used both Blekko
and Google preferred Blekko. Find out why.”). Use Oracle style marketing: less is more,
hammering one point above the fold and keeping the rest in the secondary copy.
• Cal l to action : You want someone to do something when they come to your page, like
buy something or sign up on an email form. Make sure you reiterate this “call to action”
many times. Make the call to action button cartoonishly large and in a diﬀerent font.

You can put these principles to work with your crowdfunder.

Design
Your ﬁrst goal with the wireframe should be functionality and semantic meaning: what does
the product do? Your second goal is the marketing copy: how do we explain what the
product does in words? Your ﬁnal goal is the design: how do we make the site and product
look beautiful and function beautifully? Let’s go through some high-level design principles.
• Vector and Raster Graphics : The ﬁrst thing to understand about design is the distinction
between vector and raster graphics. Whenever possible, you want to work with vector
ob jects as they will scale well and are amenable to later manipulation. Raster images
are unavoidable if you truly need photos on your site, but you should strive to minimize
them for your MVP.
• Alignment, Repetion, Contrast, Proximity : The Non-Designer’s Design Book by Robin
Williams is reasonable as a next step, with the four principles summarized here. You
can see what these four principles look like in practice: Alignment, Repetition, Contrast,
Proximity. A good strategy is to look at the examples, try to internalize the lessons,
create your design without thinking too much about them, and then re-apply them over
the design at the end.

19

• Fonts and Icons : In terms of getting something reasonably nice together quickly, you
should make heavy use of fonts. Because fonts are vector graphics speciﬁed by mathe-
matical equations, they are inﬁnitely manipulable with CSS transforms built into every
browser (which we will cover next week). The FontAwesome library also gives scalable
vector icons, which are often useful for quick mockups when enlarged in size. Even if
not the perfect image, the fact that these complex images can be generated in a single
keystroke and rotated/colored with a few more make them quite good for quick proofs-
of-concept. With a bit of practice, one can get to a reasonably good looking prototype
with pure fonts and Unicode characters.

• Stock Photos, Videos, Animations : Use iStockphoto as a visual companion to the Key-
word Tool External. Often the key to a good presentation or webpage is to put an
abstract concept into visual form. Stock photographers have actually thought about
these issues; here’s an example for launching a business. One point: don’t use stock
photos in which people are looking at the camera. That’s what makes a stock photo
look cheap. A good signal of a lower quality site is that it has inconsistent padding,
doesn’t use https properly for checkout, and/or uses stock photos of this kind. Again,
this is bad, while this is passable. You might also consider reshooting a stock photo
with your product so that it looks custom.

• Use Bootstrap, Themeforest, 99Designs, Dribbble : When it comes to turning your wire-
frames into HTML/CSS/JS, don’t reinvent the wheel. Design is information and is
becoming commoditized. Bootstrap is a free CSS framework we’ll be using through the
course. Jetstrap, mentioned previously, is a wireframing tool that exports to functional
HTML/CSS with Bootstrap. Themeforest is a set of slightly more expensive ($9-12)
templates. 99Designs is a few hundred to a few thousand bucks for a logo or web-
page revision. And Dribbble is an excellent resource for ﬁnding a contract or full time
designer.

20

